TDT4145 Data modeling and database systems:
Project delivery
The task itself is described in a separate document. This document describes the requirements
for the deliveries. You choose whether you want to write in Norwegian or English, but do not mix
languages.
Part 1 counts for 50% and part 2 counts for 50%.
Delivery, Part 1: ER Model and Relational Database Schema
DB1: Deadline Monday 9 March 14:00 (02:00 pm) on Blackboard
(NTNU requires us to deliver within working hours, no later than 2 hours before the end of work
due to computer support).
The submission consists of three parts:
a) An ER model showing the complete data model. You are free to use all ER and EER
concepts reviewed in the course. Document the assumptions you have made and any
restrictions that cannot (can) be expressed through the ER model.
b) The ER model mapped into relational database schema (tables), i.e. SQL (as in c).
Specify keys and foreign keys for each table. For each table, you must explain why the
table is in BCNF, or explain why you choose to have it in a lower normal form (you must
explain which). It is fine to supply the tables as SQL as in c). But the explanations of
normal forms must be as text.
c) An SQL script that constructs the database with the tables. Remember to specify
primary and foreign keys, as well as other necessary restrictions. Document restrictions
that are not expressed in the relational database schema and therefore must be handled
in the application programs.
d) We want answers to the following questions:
1. How (or can) you ensure that an instructor cannot be present in two different places
at the same time? Can you achieve this using your model, or does something like this
have to be implemented in the software,
2. The same question for a user. Can this be solved in the model or must it be done in
the software?
3. From which use case is the exclusion (blacklisting) tested / created? It does not have
to be one of the stated use cases.
4. Are statistics something that must be stored explicitly or is it possible to just make
queries to get answers? Discuss this.
Submit the answer as a PDF file. The SQL script must be attached as a .sql file (text file). The
document must be clear and concise, and the figures must be easy to understand. Remember
to state the group number, names of all group members and deliver on Blackboard.
Submission, part 2: Realized database system
DB2: Deadline Monday 23 March 14:00 (02:00 pm) on Blackboard
(NTNU requires us to deliver during working hours). 
TrainingDB implemented in SQL and Python using sqlite3.
The database application must be implemented in Python (some use cases are written as SQL
scripts, see the description) based on the schema from the first partial submission. If you
change the schema, that is also fine, but document what and why you have done it. The use
cases must be realized and satisfied. The simplest solution is to create a text-based interface
that runs in a terminal window (for example cmd, bash, etc.). Remember that the point of the
task is to create models, write SQL and do database access from Python. The following must be
delivered:
a) Python source code with SQL and SQL scripts packed in a zip file. We want Python and
not Jupyter notebook or other non-pure Python. It is important that we get the script that
inserts data so that we can recreate the database as it is before the use cases are run.
b) The database file of the project's SQLite database. This must be empty, so that the
sensor (grader) can run all the initialization programs you supply. It must include a recipe
for how the sensor should run the program, together with example data that is used as
input. It is important that the sensor can run the program without struggling. Remember
to test that this is possible before you deliver.
c) The textual results (output) from the use cases’ queries.
The document must be concise and any figures easy to understand. Remember to state the
group number, names of all group members and deliver on BlackBoard.
Use of AI - artificial intelligence
If you make use of artificial intelligence in the project, you must document how and where you
have used it. Among other things, you must show which part of the code has been generated by
AI and which part you have programmed yourself. Also tell which part of the code generated by
AI, which you have changed afterwards. The same applies to the use of AI in the ER part of the
project. Feel free to write something about experiences with using AI.
Evaluation criteria
The following criteria form the basis of the assessment:
DB1:
1. Structure and coherence in the data model – use of entity classes, relational classes and
attributes. These model concepts must be used consistently and appropriately, it must
be easy to understand what they model.
2. Use of keys, including natural and generated keys.
3. Use of restrictions, such as structural restrictions, in the model. These must be used
consistently and correctly.
4. Correct translation to the relational model, i.e. SQL. Correct description and assessment
of normal forms.
5. Translation to SQL tables. Correct use of SQL, including attribute domains, (foreign) key
constraints and UNIQUE.
6. The documents must be concise and the figures must be easy to understand.
Distribution of points between the parts.
1. (E)ER model: Up to 30 points.
2. Up to 10 points on SQL schema
3. Up to 5 points on assessment of normal forms.
4. Up to 5 points. Answer questions asked at the beginning (d) of the document
DB2:
1. Correct use of SQL in Python. We favor SQL over Python, so that if it is okay to solve
something in SQL, we want it, rather than it being solved in Python. All data mentioned in
the assignment must be inserted.
2. Comprehensible and readable code.
3. It must be possible to reproduce the delivered results using the program and the
database provided. The recipe for how to run the program must work.
The following points are awarded for the parts of the delivery:
1. Up to 35 points. 25 points on SQL and 10 points on associated Python.
2. Up to 5 points. Reproducibility of the results is important.
3. Up to 5 points on the correct output.
4. Up to 5 points on AI declaration.
Generally:
The grading is based on the general descriptions found here:
Karakterbeskrivelser for teknologiske fag - Kunnskapsbasen - NTNU
